Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are going
to be talking about Operation Valkyrie
and the plot to assassinate Hitler.
It’s a story of bombs, plots, secret
briefcases, underground bunkers, and
one of history’s greatest “what ifs”.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
In the early afternoon of July
20th, 1944, twenty or so senior Nazi
officials were gathered around a
long oak table in the Wolf’s Lair,
Hitler’s military headquarters on the
Eastern Front, in modern-day Poland.
The situation for the Nazi war
machine was getting worse by the day.
The Allies had landed in Normandy six
weeks earlier, Russia was advancing
on the Eastern Front, the Allies
had captured Rome, and the United
States was advancing towards Japan.
If the war was still winnable
for Nazi Germany, well, it would
take something very special.
A meeting had been called, and
senior Nazi leaders had been
instructed to fly in for it.
One such officer was Claus von
Stauffenberg, a 36-year-old
Lieutenant Colonel who had been
awarded the Iron Cross for his
bravery in the Battle of France.
Von Stauffenberg knew all too
well the cost of war; he had been
fighting in North Africa, where he
had lost an eye, his entire right
hand, and two fingers on his left.
It had taken him three months to recover,
but he was still without one eye and
seven fingers, so he was transferred to
office duty, far from the front line.
He had met Hitler on several occasions,
and Hitler had always been polite
and courteous to him; after all,
the sacrifices this man had made for
the Nazi cause were plain to see.
So when von Stauffenberg arrived a
couple of minutes late for the meeting,
instead of receiving a dressing down
and being shouted at by the Führer,
there was a quiet nod of acceptance.
Indeed, von Stauffenberg had only
arrived at the Wolf’s Lair that morning.
He would have been on time for
the meeting, but it was such a hot
day and he was drenched in sweat.
He had to go and change his shirt, and
he needed his assistant to help him.
After all, belts, buckles, and buttons,
they aren’t so simple if you are
only operating with three fingers.
The meeting was to be held in a different
room from usual; normally, these types
of meetings were held deep underground,
in reinforced concrete bunkers.
But it was so hot that nobody
would have lasted very long down
there, without any ventilation.
So the meeting was taking
place above ground, with the
windows open for fresh air.
Von Stauffenberg had been ushered into
an room next to the conference room to
allow him to get changed in private.
Together with his assistant, the pair
proceeded to open up the briefcase.
They took out the spare shirt, but
they were more interested in what the
shirt was wrapped around: two sticks
of plastic explosives, two bombs.
The men began to prime the device,
setting a timer for 10 minutes.
They completed the first, but before
the men had the chance to prime the
second bomb, there was a knock on the
door: “What are you up to in there?
Quick, the meeting is about to begin.”
There were assurances that they’d be out
in a minute; von Stauffenberg was just
having a bit of trouble with his belt.
And sure enough, shortly
after, the door opened.
Von Stauffenberg was there in
a new shirt, briefcase in hand.
He was ushered into the
conference room, where the
meeting was already in full flow.
Hitler was standing in the middle,
leaning over a map placed on the table.
Von Stauffenberg approached the table
and slid the briefcase underneath,
next to where Hitler was standing.
A couple of minutes later, an
attendant came in and knocked von
Stauffenberg on the shoulder: Sir,
there’s a telephone call for you.
Von Stauffenberg made his
excuses and left the room.
At 12.42, just a few minutes after
von Stauffenberg’s departure,
there was a massive explosion right
in the heart of the Wolf’s Lair.
It looked like it might even have
come from the conference room itself.
By this point, von Stauffenberg was making
a beeline for the perimeter, heading
for the exit as quickly as possible.
It’s not known exactly what he told
the guards to be allowed through the
numerous checkpoints that surrounded
the Wolf’s Lair, but by 1 pm, less
than 20 minutes after the blast,
von Stauffenberg and his assistant
were on an aeroplane back to Berlin.
The hard part was done.
Adolf Hitler was dead, and a bunch
of his senior leadership too.
The next part was, comparatively,
easy: mobilise the emergency
“continuity of government” plan,
appoint an interim successor, and most
probably seek peace with the Allies.
The only problem was…Hitler wasn’t dead.
Unbeknownst to von Stauffenberg, his
carefully positioned briefcase had been
slightly pushed to one side, tucked behind
the leg of the heavy oak conference table.
Most probably, this was done by an
officer called Heinz Brandt, who
just pushed the briefcase with his
feet, not out of any great patriotic
duty, but because it was in the way
of where he wanted to put his legs.
It might well have been the act that
saved Hitler’s life, but it cost
Brandt his: he died the following
day, one of the four people in the
conference room to die from the blast.
Another nine were seriously
injured, and the remaining eleven
escaped with minor injuries.
And this included the target of
the entire operation: Adolf Hitler.
His trousers were torn to shreds, his
arm was damaged, and his eardrum burst.
But he survived.
In the immediate aftermath of the
event, he could be seen wandering
around the rubble, inspecting the chaos.
Officers tried to understand
what had happened.
Had a Soviet bomber flown overhead
and dropped a bomb with such precision
that it landed in the exact conference
room where the Führer had been meeting?
No, no planes had been seen, and
there were no other explosions.
The focus quickly switched to a threat
from within, and suspicion fell on the
man who had entered with a briefcase,
then quickly left without one:
Lieutenant Colonel von Stauffenberg.
By this point, von Stauffenberg was
in the air, on the way back to Berlin.
By the time he landed, he expected
Operation Valkyrie to be well underway.
Now, Operation Valkyrie was the codename
for the operation that would be triggered
if there was a full breakdown of civic
order in Nazi Germany, or if there
was some kind of uprising from the
foreign workers in German factories.
It was essentially a plan that would see
the territorial reserve army seize control
of the streets and key state functions.
Importantly, Operation
Valkyrie wasn’t a secret plot.
It had been drawn up as a
genuine emergency plan to crush
unrest or uprisings, and Hitler
himself even signed off on it.
But unbeknownst to Hitler, Operation
Valkyrie was being used to take him down.
It was a clever idea in theory.
Kill Hitler, declare that he had been
assassinated by rogue, rebel forces
within the Nazi party, namely the SS.
Arrest these supposedly rogue forces,
declare martial law, and declare
a Field Marshall called Erwin von
Witzleben as Commander in Chief.
It was a clever idea because it would
pin all blame on the SS and “treacherous
forces within the Nazi party”, allowing
for a relatively smooth transition to
a Hitler-free Germany without all of
the mess that might come from a more
overt coup or assassination attempt.
And, after all, this was far from
the only attempt on Hitler’s life.
There are 42 documented assassination
attempts, with presumably many more
than this that were never discovered.
From poisoned letters to bombs to
snipers, starting in 1932, all manner
of methods and locations were tried.
Miraculously, Hitler survived all of them.
But it was this attempt, the attempt
of the 20th of July, 1944, which was
the widest reaching, the best planned,
and perhaps came closest to succeeding.
Now, it’s unclear exactly how
many people were involved in the
plot, and what knowledge different
people had of its inner workings.
What is clear is that there had
been various groups within the
Nazi upper leadership that had been
planning to overthrow or kill Hitler
since before the start of the war.
And as for their intentions,
well, they were varied.
Those directly involved in the July
20th plot included nationalists,
democrats, aristocrats and communists.
This wasn’t one homogenous group with
a clear, unified aim for post-Hitler
Germany, nor is it fair to characterise
them as some great upstanding group
of moral citizens who were disgusted
by the behaviour of the Nazis.
For some, this might
well have been the case.
In von Stauffenberg’s case, several
historians have suggested that
he had a strong moral objection
to the treatment of Jews.
For many other military officers, though,
the motivation was more pragmatic.
The disasters at Stalingrad in 1943,
the Allied landings in Normandy in June
1944, and the rapid Soviet advance on
the Eastern Front convinced them the
war was lost under Hitler’s leadership.
It was a motley crew, but what did
unite them was a firm belief that
Adolf Hitler needed to be removed
from power, and killing him and
pinning the blame on “rebel factions”
was the best way of doing it.
So, when von Stauffenberg touched
down in Berlin and made his way to the
army headquarters, he was expecting
to hear that Operation Valkyrie was
in full swing: Hitler was dead, the
reserve army units had taken control
of the key state institutions, and
the groups most loyal to Hitler, in
particular the SS, had been neutralised.
But he soon realised that things
weren’t going as smoothly as he had
hoped and that, in fact, there was
a potentially devastating problem.
There had been a phone call from the
Wolf’s Lair to the plotters at central
command confirming that there had been
a massive explosion in the conference
room, but the message that came
through was that Hitler had survived.
And if Hitler wasn’t dead, then
the whole thing came crashing down.
For Operation Valkyrie to work, the
reserve army units had to buy the lie
that Hitler had been killed by disloyal
forces within the Nazi party, and that was
the reason the crackdown was necessary.
At first, von Stauffenberg insisted,
“I saw the explosion. Nobody could
have survived it. Hitler is dead.”
So the plotters had these two
contradicting reports: von
Stauffenberg saying Hitler is dead,
and the other saying he isn’t.
Finally, at 4 pm that afternoon,
the order was given to put
Operation Valkyrie into action.
Radio messages were sent to major military
centres, and across Berlin, and in
military districts throughout Germany,
reserve army units were mobilised.
They began arresting local SS
officers, seizing key government
buildings, and preparing
proclamations to the German people.
For a few tense hours that
afternoon, it looked as though
the coup might actually succeed.
And let’s remember, these reserve
troops don’t know that they are part
of a coup; they are simply following
their orders, which are to put into
place this contingency plan, which
involves rooting out treacherous
elements within the Nazi party.
They even manage to detain Joseph
Goebbels, the Nazi propaganda
chief, in his Berlin office.
Goebbels has realised it’s a coup,
and knows the one thing he can do
to stop it: make sure the reservists
know that Hitler isn’t dead.
So when he is detained by Major Otto Ernst
Remer, a commanding officer of the reserve
troops, Goebbels puts Hitler on the line.
Major Remer now realises that he has been
duped, and he listens for his orders.
Crush the plot, he is
told, and take them alive.
It’s around 7 o’clock in the
evening at this point, and the
conspirators are in disarray.
General Friedrich Fromm, the commander
in chief of the reserve army, had been
aware of the plot and had done nothing
to stop it, essentially making him
a conspirator and aide to the coup.
But when it became clear that the bomb
hadn’t done its job, he quickly started
to cover his tracks, switching sides.
He even tries to have von
Stauffenberg arrested.
Chaos breaks out.
There was a firefight at the Bendlerblock,
the Berlin headquarters where several
of the conspirators were based, and
von Stauffenberg was shot in the arm.
By 11 pm that evening, the
tide had well and truly turned.
The Bendlerblock was surrounded,
and the reserve army managed
to overpower the plotters.
General Fromm pushed for an
impromptu court to be set up to
try the conspirators, and he then
court-martialled four of the conspirators,
including von Stauffenberg, who were
taken into the courtyard and shot.
Presumably, Fromm rushed this
through, despite Hitler’s express
order for the conspirators not to
be executed, so that they couldn’t
reveal his involvement in the plot.
Or, as Goebbels neatly put it,
“You have been in a damn hurry to
get your witnesses below ground."
The entire coup, or attempted
coup, lasted less than 12 hours.
And the aftermath was brutal.
Over the following weeks, the
Gestapo uncovered thousands of
people connected, or suspected of
being connected, to the conspiracy.
Show trials were held in the People’s
Court, presided over by the raging,
screaming judge Roland Freisler.
Many were humiliated before being
sentenced to death by hanging,
strangled slowly with piano wire.
In total, some 7,000 people were
arrested and almost 5,000 were executed,
including the side-switching General
Fromm, who was kept in prison for
a year, only to be executed shortly
before Germany’s surrender in 1945.
And to this day, the plot has remained
one of history’s great “what ifs”.
After all, it's almost more surprising
that the blast didn’t kill Hitler.
If von Stauffenberg had been able to
prime both bombs instead of only one,
it would almost certainly have killed him.
If the meeting had been held in a concrete
bunker deep underground, like usual,
instead of the venue being changed for
a breezier, wooden room above ground, it
would almost certainly have killed him, as
the blast force would have been contained.
If Hitler hadn’t been leaning
over the table, it would almost
certainly have killed him.
And if Heinz Brandt hadn’t pushed
the briefcase to one side, it would
almost certainly have killed him.
And if Hitler had been killed in
the blast, it seems highly probable
that Operation Valkyrie would
have proceeded as it was intended.
The reserve army would have
arrested the supposedly “disloyal”
elements within the Nazi party.
Field Marshal Erwin von Witzleben would
have become Commander-in-Chief; Germany
may well have sought peace, and World War
II might have ended in the summer of 1944.
As you’ve heard, things didn’t
work out that way, and the
consequences were devastating.
Between that hot July afternoon
in 1944 and the end of the war the
following May, another six to eight
million people would lose their lives.
If Hitler had died in the Wolf’s Lair that
day, many of them might have been spared.
Instead, the war raged on, and the failed
coup of July 20th went down as one of
history’s most haunting ‘what ifs’.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Operation Valkyrie
and the plot to kill Hitler.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.